 Wits University Second Year Information Systems IIA Systems Analysis and Development Project2023
Project Narrative:

University is an amazing time in a student’s life. There’s the promise of new, exciting experiences,
personal growth, and freedom. But it’s not without its own challenges and growing pains. One
main challenge students experience is regarding their studies. Academics/lecturers within the
university provide support to students via consultations as a method to ease the study
challenges. Each student has a distinctive profile as a learner, with a unique academic
background, strengths and areas of improvement, their own goals and objectives as well as
particular courses and extra-curricula’s. Consultations provide individualized support to students
understanding expectations and demands, clarifying goals, mapping out a plan, and learning new
strategies, techniques and tools to attain success while maintaining overall wellbeing.
Process of scheduling a consultation:
The consultation process at the university can happen in the following ways:

1. Specific dates, times and duration are provided in advance when the lecturer is available
   (usually posted on the lecturer’s office door or shared on the Ulwazi site).
Problem – Students have to wait outside the lecturer office for their turn during these pre-
planned sessions. Not known how many students will be consulting with the lecturer at the same
time.
2. An email request is sent to the lecturer requesting a consultation.
Problem – There is a time delay in receiving a response to the request.
3. Students just proceed to the lecturer’s office hoping the lecturer is free to consult.
Problem – This approach is not always a success.
4. Students will either approach the lecturer after their class or speak to the lecturer in the
   corridors.
Problem – Not sufficient time is provided to get the support required.
The issues with the current process of requesting a consultation are highlighted above. The
university is looking to implement a system whereby students can make an appointment for a
consultation. The proposed system is stand-alone, i.e. no network connectivity is included in
system design and implementation.
Users of the proposed system:

   Students (Student number, First name, Last name, Degree type)
   Lecturer (Lecturer number, First name, Last name, Office Info, Courses)
   Administrator (Admin number, First name, Last name)
General Description:
This Consultation Reservation System is a self-contained system that allows students to book
consultations and lecturers to manage consultations. Various stakeholders are involved in this
system.
Possible System Functions:

   Provide an application that enables students to book a consultation with any available
    lecturer.
   Lecturers will be able to view their consultations and manage them properly.
   Coordinate various calendars and finding available time slots for consultations.
   Reserve equipment and rooms for consultations.
   Alert students in case there is an earlier available time slot.
User Characteristics:

The system will be used in the university. The lecturers and students will be the main users. Given
the condition that not all the users are computer-literate. Some users may have to be trained on
using the system. The system is also designed to be user-friendly. It uses a Graphical User
Interface (GUI).
Student: The people who want to book the consultation
Lecturer: The specialist whom consultations are being booked for.
Administrator: They are responsible for maintaining and overseeing the database of the system.
What is the proposed system supposed to do?
A student books a consultation with a lecturer based on available time slots. The lecturer has a
consultation. The lecture creates their available time slots. The lecture belongs to a department.
The school has many departments. A student makes enquiries regarding the details of the
consultation. Individual (content based) or group (project based) consultations can be requested.
Consultations can be assigned a status, e.g. upcoming/pending or completed. The admin
manages users (add, delete, update) as well as generate reports based on information provided
by the system (number of consults completed or pending per month; total number of
students/lecturers existing on the system, etc.).
NB: Details can change as the project progresses into the various phases.

